IETF 106 NWCRG Meeting Agenda (v3)
==================================

-   [Datatracker](https://datatracker.ietf.org/rg/nwcrg/)
-   [Github](https://github.com/irtf-nwcrg/rg-materials/)

1- nwcrg@ietf106-hackathon (Saturday and Sunday, Nov. 16-17, 2019)
------------------------------------------------------------------

-   [Hackathon
    wiki](https://trac.ietf.org/trac/ietf/meeting/wiki/106hackathon)\
-   [Github swif-codec repo](https://github.com/irtf-nwcrg/swif-codec)

2- nwcrg meeting@ietf106 (Thursday, Nov. 21, 2019, Afternoon session I)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes taken by Nicolas K., Cedric A. and Oumaima A. Thanks to them.

#### 00- Welcome, administrative and general matters (Chairs)

##### Situation of the "NC for CCN/NDN: requirements and challenges" I-D

Not presented today.\
Vincent Roca (VR): Dave, you mentioned at ietf104 that it would be fine
to first have a discussion at ICNRG first before coming back to RGLC.
Did the ICNRG group made any progress? Dave Oran (DO): You are on the
spot - I have got not feedback on ICNRG on the document. Vincent Roca
(VR): Let us know when you think a RGLC is possible. DO: We gave ICNRG
one month, and maybe move on no matter. Of course, I need confirmation
from my co-chairs.

##### Situation of the RLNC I-Ds: what's next?

Not presented today.\
The authors asked the chairs to ask for feedback from the group. VR: A
question for the group is whether we should adopt I-Ds as research group
document? It would make sense for me.\
Marie-José Montpetit (MJM): I support Vincent. A goal of the group was
also to have a document for existing solutions (BATS, RLC, RLNC, Tetrys,
etc.)i,\
Emmanuel Lochin (EL): regarding TETRYS document, Jonathan D. added some
text recently and the authors do not think there is much more needed.\
MJM: You should publish that updated version so that the group can adopt
it.\
EL: Is there interest for the group for the document?\
MJM: This is in the charter, yes.

##### News from the FECFRAME-ext/RLC/TinyMT32 standardisation (TSVWG)

Vincent(Slides): Just waiting for final approval, the documents are
ready

#### 01- Sliding Window FEC (SWiF) codec hackathon feedback (Vincent Roca)

Vincent thanks Oumaima and Cedric who both made many contributions to
the codec since previous IETF. MJM emphasized that the hackthon is
really a great opportunity to see what other people are doing in the
other groups, because ther rest of the week we are all scattered
together

### Updates of existing works:

#### 02- Update of the "Coding techniques for satellite systems" I-D (Nicolas Kuhn)

(draft-irtf-nwcrg-network-coding-satellites)

All the comments from LLyod and VR have been answered (see details in
github I-D repository for Lloyd comments). Some satellite vocabulary
(satellite "payload" and "FECFRAME" in the satellite context) may create
confusion at IETF and these terms have been removed. Authors think the
document is ready for another round of Last Call.

VR: There are still editorials issues, volunteers are welcome. Anyway
MJM and VR will read it again. VR, as document sheperd, will take care
of this.

#### 03- Update of the deployment of BATS code (Raymond W. Yeung)

\[https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-yang-nwcrg-bats/\]

Raymond (RY) presents updates on the current use-case (smart lampposts)
for BATS codes.

EL: (slide 8) We know that TCP is collapsing in such use cases. Do you
use TCP?\
RY: We use UDP.\
EL: There is no feedback and no fairness. If you share multiple flows,
what happens?\
RY: In our experiments, we have only one flow.\
EL: So do you use congestion control or something like this?\
RY: There is only one link in the network, and it links lamppost with
each other.\
EL: Is it within the application protocol (if is there an application
protocol), or is it added to UDP?\
RY: Let's take it offline.\
VR: What is your target with this I-D?\
RY: We would like to have a standard describing BATS.\
VR: This is a research group, so it will not be an IETF standard but it
can be published as an informational or experimental RFC.\
DO: Are there any IPR disclosure in terms of rights?\
VR: We know from the beginning that there are IPRs with BATS solution,
RY has always been very clear on this.\
DO: What are the people rights when they use it for IRTF work (i.e., the
licencing conditions)?\
Colin Perkins (CP): the important question is: has an IPR disclosure
been made at IETF? If not, you have to make one first (see:
\[https://datatracker.ietf.org/ipr/\]).\
MJM: Having a list of existing FEC solutions is one goal of the group -
that is what people outside the group ask for. Provide the IPR
disclosure, then we'll continue and ask for document adoption.

#### 04- Update of the "RLC FEC Scheme for QUIC" I-D (Vincent Roca)

(draft-roca-nwcrg-rlc-fec-scheme-for-quic)

VR presents (without chair hat).

Carsten Bormann (CB): Do you have an intuition about the choice of E
(i.e., the symbol size)?\
VR: (slide 8) the E value is the symbool size value, it is something
important in practice. Having a large E while incoming source packets
are all small leads to producing large repair symbols which adds
overhead. A smaller E value is preferable, in particular for variable
size incoming packets. However a too small E value increases the number
of variables in the underlying linear system. hence more processing
overhead. There is a balance to find which is use-case dependent and I
dont have any definite answer.\
EL: Are you piggybacking the repair symbols at the end of the packet?\
VR: Repair symbols are transported in REPAIR frames. They are sent in
dedicated packets.\
QUIC original packet are not modified (except for the addition of a
SOURCE-FPI frame.\
Emile Stephan (ES): Do you plan to write an extension to QUIC?\
VR: Our objective is to be in position to convince the QUIC WG that FEC
can be useful to QUIC. Doing work in NWCRG enables to make progress on
the design and to continue research on benefits it brings to QUIC. We
are also waiting for QUIC v1 to be done, then we will decide what is
feasible.\
MJM: the same Louvain team has a modular QUIC implementation that
enables dynamic extensions to the protocol (see their SIGCOMM'19 paper).
That could be another approach.\
ES: Why is this specific to QUIC?\
VR: The signaling and the QUIC packet to source symbol mapping are
specific for QUIC. The rest is common to RLC specification.\
ES: It would be more general with UDP.\
MJM: QUIC is not UDP.\
VR: With FECFRAME (see soon to be published RFC 8680), you can apply FEC
to UDP flows.\
CB: \[about LOOPS\] We have something very similar, but the details of
course are different.\
VR: you just design FECFRAME to apply it to the usecase. Not a single
FEC scheme for every use case.\
EL: Adding FEC to QUIC is different than adding FEC to UDP. On the
repair format, is it optionnal? Is there a specific header for the
repair frame? Is the header different whether I use optionnal symbol
fields or not?\
VR: The repair header is specified in this I-D, and is the first part of
the REPAIR frame. It is then followed by one or more repair symbols.\
EL: Is it expected to work half-duplex and full-duplex?\
VR: There is no issue in doing both I think.\
ES: Do you need to have the session key to add coding?\
VR: No, everything happens before encryption.

### New works:

#### 05- "Coding and congestion control in transport" I-D (Nicolas Kuhn)

\[https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-kuhn-coding-congestion-transport\]

Michael Welzl (MW): The point is that the sender be informed about the
packet losses \[...\]. What if the sender may not care about the all
information? The sender may also not have accurate information and the
client may not know exactly what to report (e.g., losing 5/10 packet,
recovering 2/10).\
NK: If you are using a new type of frame in QUIC you can do that. In
general, it depends on the protocol carrying the data.\
CB: Recovered may not necessary mean the packet has been lost, a packet
may just be delayed.\
Dave: Fine, but you miss the opposite case, what do you send if the
sender ignores a recover packet? There is another dimension on the
impact of the coding rate.\
Spencer: Thank you for the draft, you are at -00 and you have already
lots of interests. You may want to consider scalable congestion controls
and the history in the IETF on the reaction to ECN signals.\
MJM: This document has been in the charter of the RG from the beginning
and this is an essential topic, sure.\
EL: Good point. I want to point out there is a contradiction between
erasure coding (it adds redundancy) and congestion control (it can
reduce transmission rate). How we are going to manage both?\
VR: The goal of the document is not to solve all the problems, the goal
is the bring some lights in this domain.\
CB: Why do you want to do congestion control? The previous answer is you
want to protect the network. But you may want to have TCP-fairness also,
so maybe you should be clear about waht your objective here.\
NK: My objective is to manage congestion control while integrating FEC
in QUIC, end-to-end. The tunnels are out of the scope of the document,
so we need TCP Fairness.\
CB: I may add an objective here, that is getting a review from the
IESG.\
DO: this is an RG, looking at the coding. It would be really be nice to
put in the document that one goal is to guide the researchers to give
some guidance on what points need to be confirmed. Because lots of of
people could spend lots of time on the wrong ideas.\
MJM: Does anybody objects in having this a RG Item document? (nobody
disagrees). Confirm on list.

#### 06- Getting and Exchanging Decoding State Information (Cedric Adjih)

VR: Thanks. This is in parts an implementation specific matter. We have
flexible set/get\_parameter() setters and getters that uses a
type-length-value approach. It could be used to have this implementation
specific extension without adding extra complexity to the core API.
Let's discuss this offline.

### Relationship with other groups:

#### 07- About LOOPS (Local Optimizations on Path Segments) (Carsten Bormann)

\[https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-welzl-loops-gen-info\]

CB: Who has been in the LOOPS side meeting?\
Half of the people in the room (approx 10/20) attended the meeting.

DO: Is reordering one of the things you are not doing?\
CB: We may do reordering.\
DO: Is it a requirement to take incoming disorder packets and reorder
them in the tunnel?\
CB: We do not know yet.\
MJM: With or without chair hat, how can we collaborate?\
CB: We look at outputs from the research group, based on specific
assumptions, and we will have questions.\
MJM: We indeed have strong opinions on the different FEC.\
CB: I guess the WG asks specific questions, that may end up being
research questions.\
EL: There are many research issues here. With tunnels, you may aggregate
flows and the protection may be per-flow or on the aggregate. I do not
have the answer for that. You may have different types of flows and
different coding schemes for them. You may end up having head of line
blocking.\
CB: We will have issues in identifying the different flows and may not
encounter this issue. Can you send the results to the list?\
EL: Sure.\
MJM: If you do that, copy both NWCRG/LOOPS lists.\
CP: You list a bunch of FEC schemes with different characteristics. When
we worked on video, we started with a simple scheme and went into more
complexity. Do you expect the same thing? You may end up having
different FEC solutions for different use-cases.\
CB: We may want to dynamically change the FEC scheme that is used.\
MJM: Add a specific signaling to detail the code that you want to use.\
CP: You may also have ACK mechanisms that report different things
depending on the FEC mechanism that is used.\
MJM: You may want the same type of interaction between NWCRG and LOOPS
as between T2TRG and CORE.
